Standard deviation tutorial (#27)
hazelcast/hazelcast-cloud-code-samples: compute/standard-deviation/docs/modules/ROOT/pages/compute-standard-deviation.adoc

Standard deviation is a statistical calculation that has been adopted for calculating how numbers deviate from the average. The business logic for standard deviation includes these steps:

. Calculate the average of the input numbers.
. Calculate the running total of the square of how much each number differs from the average.
. Calculate the average of the running total.
. Take the square root of the running total divided by the number of inputs and call it the standard deviation.

The second step is open to *parallelism*. If you have more than one CPU, you can run this step for several numbers at once, as long as you have a way to combine these independent answers into the running total. *This is what you'll use Hazelcast for*.

Here is an example of standard deviation for two sets of numbers.

.First set of numbers
[cols="4"]
|===
|Number |Difference from the average (3)|Square| Running total

|1
|2
|4
|4

|2
|1
|1
|5

|3
|0
|0
|5

|4
|1
|1
|6

|5
|2
|4
|10

|===

.Second set of numbers
[cols="4"]
|===
|Number |Difference from the average (3)|Square| Running total

|1
|2
|4
|4

|1
|1
|4
|8

|3
|0
|0
|8

|5
|2
|4
|12

|5
|2
|4
|16

|===

> Examples:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples:

```

> The running total for the first set is 10 and there were 5 numbers. 10 divided by 5 is 2. The square root of 2 gives the standard deviation of *1.41*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The running total for the first set is 10 and there were 5 numbers. 10 divided by 5 is 2. The square root of 2 gives the standard deviation of *1.41*.
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> The running total for the second set is 16 and there were 5 numbers. 16 divided by 5 is 3.2. The square root of 3.2 gives the standard deviation of *1.78*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The running total for the second set is 16 and there were 5 numbers. 16 divided by 5 is 3.2. The square root of 3.2 gives the standard deviation of *1.78*.
```

- A xref:cloud:ROOT:create-serverless-cluster.adoc[Serverless cluster].
- link:https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git[Git]
- link:https://maven.apache.org/install.html[Maven]
- JDK 8, 9, or 11 installed and set up as the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable.

[[step-one]]
== Step 1. Clone the Sample Project

All the code for this project is available on GitHub. In this step, you'll clone the project and learn how it works.

Clone the GitHub repository.

[tabs] 
====
HTTPS:: 
+ 
--
```bash
git clone https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast-cloud-code-samples.git

cd hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/compute/standard-deviation
```
--
SSH:: 
+ 
--
```bash
git clone git@github.com:hazelcast/hazelcast-cloud-code-samples.git

cd hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/compute/standard-deviation
```
--
====

The sample code for this tutorial is in the link:{github-directory}[`hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/compute/standard-deviation`] directory.

The code is separated into two parts:

- The `client` directory contains the client application that connects to the cluster and runs both the junior developer code and the senior developer code.

> - The `cluster-side` directory contains the classes that need to be uploaded to the cluster to allow the cluster to store and process (only for the senior developer code) the customer satisfaction scores.

Author: ```suggestion
- The `cluster-side` directory contains the classes that need to be uploaded to the cluster to allow the cluster to store and process the customer satisfaction scores. The customer satisfaction scores are processed by the cluster only in the senior developer code.
```

[%collapsible]
====
In this class, the average is calculated like this:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::standard-deviation:example$client/src/main/java/your/company/name/JuniorDeveloper.java[tag=average]
----

This code is easy to understand, which is good for maintenance. However, it has three flaws:

- This code requires every customer record to be moved from where the data is stored (in this case the Hazelcast cluster) to where the calculation is run. Even if a projection were added, this is very heavy on the network.

- The `keySet()` operation produces a collection that contains all the keys to iterate across. If this collection is large, it could result in memory overflow.

- If the map is empty, the code results in a division by zero. A good unit test would find this.

The sum of the square of the differences is calculated on the client-side like this:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::standard-deviation:example$client/src/main/java/your/company/name/JuniorDeveloper.java[tag=stdev]
----

link:{github-directory}/client/src/main/java/your/company/name/JuniorDeveloper.java[View source]
====

.Client `SeniorDeveloper.java`
[%collapsible]
====

> In this class, the average is calculated in one line:

Author: ```suggestion
In this class, the average is calculated in one line. Hazelcast provides built-in functions for this type of calculation.
```

= Process Customer Satisfaction Scores on {hazelcast-cloud}
:page-product: cloud
:page-layout: tutorial
:page-categories: In-Memory Computing
:page-lang: java
:page-est-time: 30 mins
:page-serverless: true

> :description: pass:q[In this tutorial, you'll build an application that calculates the standard deviation of customer satifaction scores, using code that's executed in {hazelcast-cloud}.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:description: pass:q[In this tutorial, you'll build an application that calculates the standard deviation of customer satisfaction scores, using code that's executed in {hazelcast-cloud}.]
```

:github-directory: https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/tree/master/compute/standard-deviation

{description}

== Context

> Knowing the center of a dataset (average, mean, or median) such as customer satisfaction scores doesn't provide enough insight into the best and worse scores. To find out how the customer satisfaction scores are spread out, you can use link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_deviation[standard deviation].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Knowing the center of a dataset (average, mean, or median) doesn't provide enough insight into the best and worse scores. To find out how the customer satisfaction scores are spread out, it is better to use link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_deviation[standard deviation].
```

Standard deviation is a statistical calculation that has been adopted for calculating how numbers deviate from the average. The business logic for standard deviation includes these steps:

. Calculate the average of the input numbers.
. Calculate the running total of the square of how much each number differs from the average.
. Calculate the average of the running total.
. Take the square root of the running total divided by the number of inputs and call it the standard deviation.

The second step is open to *parallelism*. If you have more than one CPU, you can run this step for several numbers at once, as long as you have a way to combine these independent answers into the running total. *This is what you'll use Hazelcast for*.

Here is an example of standard deviation for two sets of numbers.

.First set of numbers
[cols="4"]
|===
|Number |Difference from the average (3)|Square| Running total

|1
|2
|4
|4

|2
|1
|1
|5

|3
|0
|0
|5

|4
|1
|1
|6

|5
|2
|4
|10

|===

.Second set of numbers
[cols="4"]
|===
|Number |Difference from the average (3)|Square| Running total

|1
|2
|4
|4

|1

> |1

Author: ```suggestion
|2
```

|4
|8

|3
|0
|0
|8

|5
|2
|4
|12

|5
|2
|4
|16

|===

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Examples:
```

The running total for the first set is 10 and there were 5 numbers. 10 divided by 5 is 2. The square root of 2 gives the standard deviation of *1.41*.

The running total for the second set is 16 and there were 5 numbers. 16 divided by 5 is 3.2. The square root of 3.2 gives the standard deviation of *1.78*.

> This proves that the first set of numbers doesn't vary as much as the second set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Standard proves that the first set of numbers doesn't vary as much as the second set.
```

In this tutorial, you'll deploy the following to {hazelcast-cloud}:

> - A `Customer` class that you'll use to store `Customer` objects in a map. The objects will include a customer satisfaction score.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A `Customer` class to store `Customer` objects in a map. The objects will include a customer satisfaction score.
```

> - An EntryProcessor that the cluster will use to calculate the standard deviation of all customer satisfaction scores in the map.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An entry processor that the cluster will use to calculate the standard deviation of all customer satisfaction scores in the map.
```

You'll then use a client to connect to the cluster, load some `Customer` objects into a map, and calculate the standard deviation of all customer satisfaction scores.

> The client code shows both the junior developer and senior developer approach. The junior developer approach does the processing on the client-side. The senior developer approach is more efficient because it offloads the processing to {hazelcast-cloud}, using the EntryProcessor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client code shows both the junior developer and senior developer approach. The junior developer approach does the processing on the client-side. The senior developer approach is more efficient because it offloads the processing to {hazelcast-cloud} using the entry processor.
```

TIP: The code in this tutorial is available as a link:{github-directory}[sample app on GitHub].

== Before you Begin

You'll need the following to complete this tutorial:

- A xref:cloud:ROOT:create-serverless-cluster.adoc[Serverless cluster].
- link:https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git[Git]
- link:https://maven.apache.org/install.html[Maven]

> - JDK 8, 9, or 11 installed and set up as the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable.

Reviewer: Not sure of the wording on this.

[[step-one]]
== Step 1. Clone the Sample Project

> All the code for this project is available on GitHub. In this step, you'll clone the project and learn how it works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this step, you'll clone the sample code from GitHub and learn how it works.
```

Clone the GitHub repository.

[tabs] 
====
HTTPS:: 
+ 
--
```bash
git clone https://github.com/hazelcast/hazelcast-cloud-code-samples.git

cd hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/compute/standard-deviation
```
--
SSH:: 
+ 
--
```bash
git clone git@github.com:hazelcast/hazelcast-cloud-code-samples.git

cd hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/compute/standard-deviation
```
--
====

> The sample code for this tutorial is in the link:{github-directory}[`hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/compute/standard-deviation`] directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sample code is in the link:{github-directory}[`hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/compute/standard-deviation`] directory.
```

The code is separated into two parts:

> - The `client` directory contains the client applications that connect to the cluster and run both the junior developer code and the senior developer code.

Author: ```suggestion
- The `client` directory contains the client application that connects to the cluster and runs both the junior developer code and the senior developer code.
```

> - The `cluster-side` directory contains the classes that need to be uploaded to the cluster to allow the cluster to store and process (only for the senior developer code) the customer satisfaction scores.

Reviewer: I'm not sure which part of this statement is only for the senior developer

> The important parts to understand are in the differences between the junior developer code and the senior developer code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The important parts to understand are the differences between the junior developer code and the senior developer code.
```

In each example, the cluster stores five `Customer` objects, and the simplest Hazelcast cluster has one member.

The junior developer code must request five integers from the cluster in order to run the calculation. The senior developer code runs the calculation on the cluster and returns one double across the network. So the choice is five network transfers or one.

> Now imagine the you have 1,000,000 `Customer` objects stored on two Hazelcast members. One member could handle this volume but wouldn't be resilient to failure. So the junior developer approach now requests 1,000,000 integers from the cluster across the network and the senior developer approach retrieves two doubles, one from each member.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now imagine that you have 1,000,000 `Customer` objects stored on two Hazelcast members. One member could handle this volume but wouldn't be resilient to failure. So the junior developer approach now requests 1,000,000 integers from the cluster across the network and the senior developer approach retrieves two doubles, one from each member.
```

It's clear that if data volumes increase, the cluster-side computation copes better. The same amount of data still has to be examined, but less data moves.

.Client `JuniorDeveloper.java`
[%collapsible]
====
In this class, the average is calculated like this:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::standard-deviation:example$client/src/main/java/your/company/name/JuniorDeveloper.java[tag=average]
----

This code is easy to understand, which is good for maintenance. However, it has three flaws:

> - This code requires every customer record to be moved from where the data is stored (in this case the Hazelcast cluster) to where the calculation is run. Even if a projection were added, this is very heavy on the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The code requires every customer record to be moved from where the data is stored, in this case the Hazelcast cluster, to where the calculation is run. Even if a projection were added, this approach places a heavy load on the network.
```

- The `keySet()` operation produces a collection that contains all the keys to iterate across. If this collection is large, it could result in memory overflow.

- If the map is empty, the code results in a division by zero. A good unit test would find this.

The sum of the square of the differences is calculated on the client-side like this:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::standard-deviation:example$client/src/main/java/your/company/name/JuniorDeveloper.java[tag=stdev]
----

link:{github-directory}/client/src/main/java/your/company/name/JuniorDeveloper.java[View source]
====

.Client `SeniorDeveloper.java`
[%collapsible]
====
In this class, the average is calculated in one line:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::standard-deviation:example$client/src/main/java/your/company/name/SeniorDeveloper.java[tag=average]
----

> Hazelcast provides built-in functions for this type of calculation.

Author: ```suggestion
```

The sum of the square of the differences is calculated on the cluster-side like this:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::standard-deviation:example$client/src/main/java/your/company/name/SeniorDeveloper.java[tag=stdev]
----

> The client uses the ExecutorService API to run a `Callable` task on each member in the cluster. The `Callable` class is named `TotalDifferenceSquaredCallable.java` and it runs the calculation on the Hazelcast member where it is invoked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client uses the ExecutorService API to run a Callable task on each member in the cluster. The Callable class is named `TotalDifferenceSquaredCallable.java` and it runs the calculation on the Hazelcast member where it is invoked.
```

> Each member calculates a sub-total only for the data that member owns. If you have two members, the calculation takes half the time. If you have ten members, the calculation takes a tenth of the time. Each member runs it's calculation independently, the runtime is dependent on how much data each member hosts rather than how much data as a whole exists.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each member calculates a subtotal only for the data that member owns. If you have two members, the calculation takes half the time. If you have ten members, the calculation takes a tenth of the time. Each member runs its calculation independently, the runtime is dependent on how much data each member hosts rather than how much data exists as a whole.
```

To do this, the task uses the `localKeySet()` method instead of the `keySet()` method. This `localKeySet()` method returns the keys that are held by the current process, and since the task is run on all processes, all the keys are included.

Each member in the cluster only needs to work with the keys, and therefore entries, that it owns. As a result, members don't have to do any network calls to retrieve the keys from elsewhere.

> Finally, the task is submitted across each member in the cluster, which results in a collection of `Future` objects. One `Future` is returned for each member that runs the task, and the task needs to wait for them all to finish. This is not exactly difficult, and since all members will have roughly the same amount of data, you can assume execution time is equal and iterate across this collection running `Future.get()` to get the sub-total from each member.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the task is submitted across each member in the cluster, which results in a collection of `Future` objects. One `Future` is returned for each member that runs the task, and the task needs to wait for them all to finish. This is not exactly difficult, since all members will have roughly the same amount of data. You can assume that the execution time is the same for all members and iterate across this collection running `Future.get()` to get the subtotal from each member.
```

WARNING: The code in this example disregards concurrency. Step 1 calculates the average, then step 2 calculates the deviation from the average. It is possible that records are added or removed between step 1 and 2, which makes the calculation wrong.

link:{github-directory}/client/src/main/java/your/company/name/SeniorDeveloper.java[View source]
====

[[step-two]]
== Step 2. Deploy the Classes to the Cluster

In this step, you'll use the {hazelcast-cloud} Maven plugin to package the cluster-side modules into a single JAR file and upload that file to your cluster.

. Open the `pom.xml` file in the `hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/compute/standard-deviation/cluster-side` directory.

. Configure the Maven plugin with values for the following elements:
+
[cols="1a,1a"]
|===
|Element|Location in {hazelcast-cloud} console

|`<clusterName>`

> |Go to *Connect your Application*. The cluster name is listed in a table at the bottom of the modal window.

Author: ```suggestion
|Go to *Connect Client*. The cluster name is listed in a table at the bottom of the modal window.
```

|`<apiKey>` and `<apiSecret>`
|
include::cloud:ROOT:developer.adoc[tag=create]

|===
+
[source,xml,indent=0]
----
include::standard-deviation:example$cluster-side/pom.xml[tag=maven-plugin]
----

. Change into the `hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/compute/standard-deviation/cluster-side` directory.

. Execute the following goal of the Maven plugin to package the project into a JAR file and deploy that file to your cluster:
+
```bash
mvn clean package hazelcast-cloud:deploy
```

> You should see that the file was uploaded and is ready to be used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The file is uploaded and is ready to be used:
```

```bash
[INFO] Artifact with custom classes standard-deviation-cluster-side-0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar was uploaded and is ready to be used
```

[[step-three]]
== Step 3. Run the Client Application

Now that the cluster-side modules are ready to use, you can run the client to trigger the process of calculating the standard deviation of customer satisfaction scores.

. Change into the `hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/compute/standard-deviation/client` directory.

. Execute the client.
+
```bash
mvn clean compile exec:java@standard-deviation
```

> You should see that the client connected to the cluster and calculated the standard deviation, using both the junior developer code and the senior developer code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The client connects to the cluster and calculates the standard deviation using both the junior developer code and the senior developer code.
```

--------------------------------------------------
TestDataLoader.loadTestData('your.company.name.Customer')
 -> 0 Customer [firstName=Brian, satisfaction=4]
 -> 1 Customer [firstName=Mick, satisfaction=1]
 -> 2 Customer [firstName=Keith, satisfaction=2]
 -> 3 Customer [firstName=Bill, satisfaction=5]
 -> 4 Customer [firstName=Charlie, satisfaction=3]

Step 1 : ----------------
Locally calculated average..: 3.0
Remotely calculated average.: 3.0
-------------------------
Step 2 : ----------------
Locally calculated total difference squared..: 10.0
Remotely calculated total difference squared.: 10.0
-------------------------
Step 3 : ----------------
Locally calculated average difference squared..: 2.0
Remotely calculated average difference squared.: 2.0
-------------------------
Step 4 : ----------------
Locally calculated STANDARD DEVIATION..: 1.4142135623730951
Remotely calculated STANDARD DEVIATION.: 1.4142135623730951
-------------------------
--------------------------------------------------
Disconnecting the Hazelcast client
--------------------------------------------------
```

== Summary

In this tutorial, you learned how to do the following:

> - Use an EntryProcessor to process data in parallel on {hazelcast-cloud}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use an entry processor to process data in parallel on {hazelcast-cloud}.
```

> - Deploy cluster-side modules to a {hazelcast-cloud} cluster, using the {hazelcast-cloud} Maven plugin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deploy cluster-side modules to a {hazelcast-cloud} cluster using the {hazelcast-cloud} Maven plugin.
```

----

. Change into the `hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/compute/standard-deviation/cluster-side` directory.

. Execute the following goal of the Maven plugin to package the project into a JAR file and deploy that file to your cluster:
+
```bash
mvn clean package hazelcast-cloud:deploy
```

The file is uploaded and is ready to be used:

```bash
[INFO] Artifact with custom classes standard-deviation-cluster-side-0.1-SNAPSHOT.jar was uploaded and is ready to be used
```

[[step-three]]
== Step 3. Run the Client Application

Now that the cluster-side modules are ready to use, you can run the client to trigger the process of calculating the standard deviation of customer satisfaction scores.

. Open the link:https://cloud.hazelcast.com/[{hazelcast-cloud} console].

. Go to *Connect Client* > *Advanced setup*, and click *Download keystore file*.

. Extract the files and copy the `client.keystore` and `client.truststore` files to the `client/src/main/resources` directory.

. Leave the {hazelcast-cloud} console open. You'll need some of these details in next steps.

. Change into the `hazelcast-cloud-code-samples/compute/standard-deviation/client` directory.

. Execute the client.
+
```bash

> mvn clean compile exec:java@standard-deviation

Author: ```suggestion
mvn clean compile exec:java@standard-deviation -Dexec.cleanupDaemonThreads=false
```

Now that the cluster-side modules are ready to use, you can run the client to trigger the process of calculating the standard deviation of customer satisfaction scores.

. Open the link:https://cloud.hazelcast.com/[{hazelcast-cloud} console].

. Go to *Connect Client* > *Advanced setup*, and click *Download keystore file*.

> . Extract the files and copy the `client.keystore` and `client.truststore` files to the `client/src/main/resources` directory.

Reviewer: Minor point. I had to create the resources directory. It didn't previously exist.

Author: Thanks - I added a file to the directory so that we can commit it.
